---
layout: post
title: CS 6750 Spotify Redesign
image: "/posts/Spotify.png"
tags: [Human-Computer Interaction]
---
# Background
I took the CS6750 Human-Computer Interaction graduate course at Georgia Tech during the Fall 2023 semester. The course delves into the fundamentals of the relationship between humans and computers and explores methodologies used in creating and assessing user-centered systems. Throughout the semester, we worked on completing a pass through of the design life cycle detailed in the course to redesign how an existing interface addressed a specific task. My chosen interface was the Your Library screen on Spotify's mobile app and the task was searching for music outside of one's library while in this screen. The following is a quick recap of my project that goes through a summary of each of the four design life cycle phases: Needfinding, Design Alternatives, Prototyping, and Evaluation.

# Needfinding
The study encompassed three primary needfinding exercises: participant observation, survey, and evaluating Apple Music's interface as a comparison. I conducted a self-assessment on Spotify, suggesting interface enhancements such as differentiating in-library search, clearer indications of library searches, and improved keyboard placement during searches. The survey, completed by 25 respondents, highlighted challenges faced by users, primarily related to playlist searches and local downloads, corroborating the need for improved search functionality. An evaluation of Apple Music highlighted differences in search features, such as a single search icon and a toggle for in-library and global search. 

I accounted for biases in each exercise, acknowledging and addresses biases like confirmation bias, question order bias, and satisficing. We used a data inventory which outlined user characteristics, task context, goals, and needs based on the findings. Requirements for redesigning the interface are proposed, emphasizing informing users during library searches, enabling prompt global searches, and ensuring usability improvements. Continued needfinding exercises included voice command interactions and further understanding local downloads' impact on searches. 

# Design Alternatives
During this phase, I generated redesign ideas through brainstorming, followed by selection based on specific criteria and subsequent prototyping. The brainstorming phase yielded twenty-three ideas, later condensed to eleven potential design alternatives. The selection criteria involve data inventory items and requirements, leading to three chosen alternatives for prototyping (textual, paper, and card prototypes) each addressing different aspects of the redesign problem.

# Prototyping
 The textual prototype focused on improving search prompts, feedback, and search mode toggles. The paper prototype simplified the interface, modified search bar features, and removed redundant icons. The card prototype involved sequential user interactions, removing the top search icon and integrating a toggle between in-library and global searches. Each prototype was evaluated against requirements, addressing varied aspects of search functionality and feedback, with the card prototype introducing a user-guided search mode switch.

# Evaluation
The project involved three types of evaluations: qualitative, empirical, and predictive. The qualitative evaluation focused on the textual prototype, presented to existing Spotify mobile users through an online survey. The survey assessed proposed modifications to the search function, such as changing prompts for failed searches and introducing hyperlinks for global searches. The empirical evaluation involved the paper prototype's comparison with the current interface, assessing task success rates among participants performing specific actions. The predictive evaluation included a cognitive walkthrough of a card prototype to understand user navigation and efficiency in achieving music search goals. Due to time constraints and participant recruitment difficulties, the empirical evaluation was not executed, and instead, emphasis was placed on the qualitative and predictive evaluations.

Survey results indicated positive reception overall for the prototype compared to Spotify's current approach, despite some concerns about the hyperlinks suggesting a movement outside the app. The analysis highlighted unexpected feedback, such as users desiring in-app recommendations for unavailable media, and anticipated feedback like the suggestion to merge universal and in-library searches. A cognitive walkthrough was conducted to guide users in navigating the prototype. I discussed insights gained from the walkthrough, proposed further needfinding investigations, design alternatives, and prototype adjustments. Considering the positive response to the textual prototype, I intended to elevate its fidelity to wireframe level but maintains the card prototype's current fidelity. Future evaluations would involve another qualitative assessment and a think-aloud study to complement the survey and walkthrough insights.

# Conclusion
The redesign process of Spotify's Your Library screen involved meticulous needfinding, diverse design alternatives, rigorous prototyping, and varied evaluations. The culmination of user-centric insights gathered and applied throughout the design life cycle resulted in promising prototypes, signaling an opportunity for elevated fidelity while maintaining distinct elements to address user needs effectively. Subsequent iterations would refine the design, ensuring a more intuitive and user-friendly experience in navigating and searching for music within Spotify's mobile app.
